hi I'm Callie from crk training today I
am back here with ladi our young Gypsy
Vanner gelding and what we're going to
work on with him today is talking about
the topic of teaching a young horse to
move their haunches and to move their
shoulders so this is a question that I
actually get pretty frequently is how to
start these movements and start them
with a horse that doesn't really know
them so I thought that laddie would be a
good one to help me do this video for
you so usually what I start with is
moving the hindquarters that just tends
to be the easiest to get the horse to
move and the idea behind this behind
training this and really behind a lot of
the things that we train is that we want
to find a way to set the horse up that
they're going to offer the correct
response most easily and then of course
we're going to release whatever pressure
we're using when they do offer that
correct response then we could also use
a reward or in this case today I'm just
going to praise laddie and release the
pressure of my leg when he does the
correct movement I also like to use the
fence line because what that does is it
just helps set him up a little bit more
to give me the correct response sooner
by kind of taking out one option of
movement so this can be a little bit
more difficult just starting out
sometimes into open because they've got
a few more options for movement and for
directions they can move that way so
what I'm going to do here is I'm going
to start by asking laddie to move his
hindquarters away from the rail so I'm
going to be using my right leg and I'm
going to be asking him to move his
hindquarters this way so what I'm going
to do to start this is I'm just going to
take a little bit of feel on my right
rein I'm not pulling on it not pulling
his nose towards the rail just a little
feel here and I've got my rein short
enough that if he starts to try to walk
forward in response to my leg if he
starts to you know move off this way
with his shoulders or move his shoulders
this way I can basically just say no
that's not the right response with the
reins and that's why I want to have them
just a little
contact that I'm able to easily do that
so I've got a little fee on my right
rein here I'm going to take my right leg
back and you'll see this in a moment
when we shoot it a little different
angle what I'm actually doing with my
leg I'm going to put my leg on here go
boy as soon as he offers the right
response I'm going to stop and most
horses if you set them up to do this
correct to do this if you set it up
correctly they'll offer the right
response pretty easily good boy so you
see there as he just kind of shifts
around he's not quite sure I just keep
my leg there I don't start kicking him
harder I don't do anything like that I
just wait and I kind of let him move
around a little bit and then move in the
right direction and the more that you
can usually just be patient especially
when they're thinking about it and kind
of give them the time to think it
through that's what it's going to work
best so I can't ask him to move any more
this way because that would be asking
him to move into the fence and he's not
going to want to do that he's going to
move something else so I'm going to move
him back off the other leg so now in
this case I'm taking a little bit of
contact with my left rein moving my left
leg back good boy same thing again good
boy
and you'll notice that at this point I'm
only asking for a step at a time
and then when he gets the good step we
take enough of a break that it feels
like a break to him like a lot of times
you don't want to just pause and then
ask for it right away again give them
enough time to kind of process it a
little bit make it feel like it's an
actual little reward by giving them a
little bit of a break and then ask for
the next step now from this angle you'll
be able to see more clearly what I'm
doing with my leg here so I've got the
little contact here with the left rein
notice that the leg is back slightly
it's not way back here I'm not the more
that you move your leg too far and you
do too much with your leg it kind of
will start to tweak your position
through the rest of your body and to the
horse I think it feels like you're the
rider can get a little pretzel DUP up
here so just a little contact here
I have my leg back so there he just took
a wrong step with the shoulder I'm going
to wait and there was that last step
with the hips that I really started so
now we're going to move into the next
one and we're going to work on the
shoulders a little bit
same concept by using the fence first
time from this position I'm going to ask
him to move his shoulders this way so
what I'm going to do here is I'm going
to move both my hands slightly to the
left and I'm going to put on my right
leg at the girth so for the haunches it
was slightly back I asked for the
shoulders it's going to be at the girth
and I'm going to think about just kind
of shifting my weight in that direction
good boy and even a weight shift that
way I like to release on so look for the
smallest things that you can release on
good boy good boy so we want little
correct steps more than lots of
incorrect movement with maybe the right
things thrown in there somewhere because
I feel it's easier for them to
understand this when they think about it
and then slowly move in the right
direction and you say yep that's good
and then as they get more coordinated
you could start to make it look a little
bit better and be a little bit more
rhythmic so we're just going to take him
back this way so now I'm going to take
both my hands to the right left leg at
the girth notice I'm not moving things
far the more you try to move and pull
good boy and pull them into where you
want them usually the harder it is to
actually get what you're looking for the
more you can just stay soft give them a
little bit of a little movement really
think about where you want them and kind
of give them time to figure that out the
better it goes we're going to do one
more step here we're almost to the fence
good boy good boy okay so that is the
basic idea of how I use my cues and kind
of the sum of the X
sizes that I use or some of the ways
that I set up the exercise using the
fence line and asking the horse to kind
of move in this half circle back and
forth as they're learning to move their
haunches and move their shoulders so
thank you so much for watching if you
have any questions go ahead and put them
in the comments and if you want to post
your questions at crk trading blog com
that's where the best conversation
happens I look forward to seeing you
there thanks for watching